---
title: "Political Manifesto for Pride Month" # Title of your project
date: 2024-07-30T16:51:38+01:00
weight: 150 # Order in which to show this project on the home page
image: manifest-logo.png
alt: "some alt text"
summary: "Marzahn Pride is over, but the fight continues!"
draft: false
color: yellow
menuIdentifier: about
aliases: [/en/about/manifest-2023]
---

The ongoing war of Russia against Ukraine, tightened laws, and political hate campaigns against the LGBTIQ\* community in Russia, as well as anti-queer policies in neighboring countries, make it clear: Even in 2024, LGBTIQ\* people are in danger and need our full solidarity!

We stand in solidarity with all people affected by war, colonialism, imperialism, patriarchy, and dictatorial regimes. We stand by all LGBTIQ\* individuals who face discrimination and violence in their home countries, while fleeing, or even in seemingly safe countries. We demand a life of security, freedom, and dignity for all. LGBTIQ\* rights were, are, and always will be human rights!

## Peace and Freedom for Ukraine - Slava Ukraini!

We vehemently condemn Russia's illegal war of aggression against Ukraine, which marks yet another escalation of a war that has been ongoing since 2014. With the annexation of Crimea and Russia’s attack on eastern Ukraine, Russia initiated another imperialist war. Since the Euromaidan protests in 2013, it has been evident that Ukraine is pursuing a Western orientation toward Europe, striving for change and progress. European values, democracy, and the desire for freedom and independence from Russian interests defined the revolutionary protests, which cost around 130 lives.

The international community initially accepted Russia’s war actions and annexations without significant resistance, imposing only economic sanctions. As we now know, the silence of Western countries regarding Russia’s crimes was a grave mistake. Bucha, Mariupol, and the destruction of the Kakhovka dam leave no doubt about the immense war crimes committed by a terrorist state, aimed at annihilating Ukraine, its infrastructure, cultural heritage, and even nature.

Since February 24, 2022, nearly a million people have fled from Ukraine to Germany, including thousands from the LGBTIQ\* community. LGBTIQ\* refugees are particularly vulnerable to the consequences of war and displacement. In war zones, access to medical care, safe shelters, and other essential resources is lacking. Not everyone has the option to flee, such as trans women who are legally classified as male by Ukrainian authorities and are denied exit due to general mobilization. Living conditions for trans\* individuals in war are especially harsh, often lacking access to crucial medications and hormone therapy.

Yet, the resilience of the LGBTIQ\* community in Ukraine under wartime conditions has been remarkable. They have organized themselves through various initiatives, established shelters, carried out evacuations, provided humanitarian aid, and informed the international community about human rights violations. Not to mention the courage of LGBTIQ\* individuals who have taken up arms to defend Ukraine and have even formed their own LGBTIQ\* battalions. One thing is clear: a life of safety and freedom would be impossible for the LGBTIQ\* community under Russian occupation.

Diplomacy will not stop Russia. For a swift end to the war, the international community must provide financial support and military equipment so that Ukraine can defend itself and save lives.

A Russian military victory would be catastrophic not only for Ukraine but also for other neighboring states where Russia seeks or already exerts political influence (e.g., Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, Armenia, Kazakhstan). To prevent this, those responsible for war crimes in Ukraine must be brought before international courts, and a collective reckoning must be initiated within Russian society.

When the war ends, we look forward with hope to Ukraine’s future EU membership, which offers a chance to advance LGBTIQ\* rights in the country. Already, a year ago, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy expressed openness to the introduction of same-sex partnerships, and public surveys by the Ukrainian human rights organization Nash Svit (2022) show increasing tolerance and recognition of equal rights for LGBTIQ\* people. Whether in Ukraine or Germany, continuous solidarity and concrete support for the Ukrainian LGBTIQ\* community are necessary—through donations to Ukrainian networks, volunteer aid for refugees, or public awareness campaigns that keep the war in Ukraine from fading into oblivion.

Not only for Ukraine but also for other neighboring states where Russia seeks or already exerts political influence (such as Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, Armenia, or Kazakhstan), a military success for Russia would be disastrous for the protection of human rights. To prevent this, those responsible for all war crimes in Ukraine must be brought before international courts, and a process of collective reckoning and responsibility must be initiated within Russian society.

With the end of the war, we also look forward with hope to Ukraine’s imminent membership in the European Union, seeing it as an opportunity to expand LGBTIQ\* rights in the country. Already a year ago, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy expressed openness to the introduction of same-sex partnerships, and recent surveys, such as those conducted by the Ukrainian human rights organization Nash Svit (2022), show increasing tolerance and recognition of equal rights for the LGBTIQ\* community within Ukrainian society. Whether in Ukraine or Germany, continued solidarity and active support for the Ukrainian LGBTIQ\* community are needed—through donations to Ukrainian networks, volunteer assistance for refugees, or public campaigns that ensure the war in Ukraine is not forgotten.

## Long live the LGBTIQ\* community in Belarus - Zhyvie Belarus!

Since 2020, following the largest pro-democracy protests in the history of Belarus, the country has been in a state of legal and political stagnation. The scale of political repression has reached an unprecedented level and remains unrelenting to this day. Over the past 10 months, an average of 10 people have been imprisoned daily for political reasons. Since the start of nationwide protests in Belarus in August 2020, more than 45,000 people have been subjected to brutal arrests, various forms of police violence, torture, and inhumane treatment. To this day, more than 1,500 people have been recognized as political prisoners in Belarus.

During the 2020 presidential election campaign and subsequent protests, LGBTIQ\* individuals were an active part of the democracy movement. Activists joined campaigns for independent election monitoring and fair vote counting and participated in the election campaigns of alternative presidential candidates. Additionally, in the summer and autumn of 2020, the LGBTIQ\* community in Belarus was able to organize its own queer bloc within the large Sunday demonstrations in Minsk to support democratic change in the country.

Since the fall of 2020, many of those who took part in the demonstrations have faced political persecution. LGBTIQ\* individuals were arrested both directly during the protests and on the basis of fabricated, politically motivated charges. For instance, trans activist Zhenya Velko was subjected to inhumane and discriminatory mistreatment after his arrest and was forced to leave the country. Pressure on family members, job dismissals, and imprisonments led a portion of society to relocate to neighboring countries. Since entry into the EU was not possible due to closed borders, some activists moved to Ukraine.

Starting in July 2021, Belarus saw a massive forced liquidation of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil society initiatives. By the end of summer 2022, approximately 1,000 civil society organizations were either forcibly dissolved by court order or compelled to disband due to pressure from state authorities. The liquidation of NGOs was and continues to be highly politically motivated: organizations that participated in or supported democratic processes in 2020 have faced searches, inspections, and the arrests of their employees. Additionally, political arrests have also targeted human rights activists advocating for the rights of incarcerated LGBTIQ\* individuals.

Belarusian LGBTIQ\* activists who fled to Ukraine between 2020 and 2022 were actively involved in local LGBTIQ\* movements. They were among the first to assist in the evacuation of Belarusian and Ukrainian LGBTIQ\* people from Ukraine and played a key role in emergency aid projects.

Those who continued their work in Belarus participated in anti-war actions in February 2022. For example, lesbian artist Vika Grebennikova was forced to leave Belarus after being arrested at protests and pressured by security forces. Additionally, the risk of mobilization led to the flight of individuals who could potentially be subject to military conscription. Events in support of Ukraine and fundraising efforts for those affected by Russia's war of aggression took place in Minsk and other cities.

Despite Belarus existing under a state of hybrid occupation within the framework of “integration with Russia” and the creation of the “Union State,” there is technically no "law banning propaganda" in Belarus. However, homophobia remains an important tool of state violence and repression. One particularly degrading practice is the forced publication of coerced "confession" videos, in which political prisoners are made to "repent" for their involvement in the pro-democracy movement in front of a camera.

Many gay men have been forcibly outed in these videos. They are pressured into expressing "remorse" for their homosexuality, filmed surrounded by sex toys, and forced to reveal personal details about their private lives. This is a blatant violation of privacy and a direct assault on human dignity.

On June 19, 2023, the Belarusian Prosecutor General’s Office announced plans to introduce administrative penalties for the "propaganda of non-traditional sexual relationships, gender transition, pedophilia, and child-free ideology." This marks yet another step toward "integration," meaning the hybrid occupation of Belarus by the Russian Federation. This measure will severely impact the already vulnerable LGBTIQ\* population in the country and create new avenues for the political persecution of activists.

## Solidarity with the LGBTIQ Community in Russia

While spaces for the LGBTIQ\* community in Russia have always been restricted, the situation has deteriorated dramatically since the beginning of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. In Russian state propaganda, LGBTIQ\* people are portrayed as an internal political enemy. The entire LGBTIQ\* community and everything it represents are used as symbols of "the West" and its values, which stand in contrast to the "traditional," ultraconservative worldview promoted by Russian politics. This narrative serves to legitimize political and legal persecution, further fueling discrimination at all levels of society. Violence against LGBTIQ\* individuals is politically sanctioned and reinforced by daily propaganda.

After the so-called "law against LGBT propaganda among minors" was passed in 2013, a significant increase in hate crimes against LGBTIQ\* people was already noticeable by 2017. The "law on the total ban of LGBT propaganda," enacted in December 2022, is expected to trigger a new wave of homophobic and transphobic violence. Due to censorship, the de facto ban on many independent media outlets, and the "foreign agents" law, access to information has become severely restricted, making it even more difficult for LGBTIQ\* individuals to learn about their rights. This situation is especially critical for people living in regions where violence against LGBTIQ\* individuals is most severe, such as the North Caucasus, southern Russia, and Siberia.

Since April 2023, trans\* individuals in Russia face a new and alarming threat—a draft law that seeks to completely ban both medical and legal gender transition. Human rights activists warn that this bill not only threatens the ability of trans\* people to change their legal documents but also limits access to medical support for hormone therapy. If adopted, this law will not only further marginalize trans\* people in society but will also directly endanger their health by severely restricting access to medical care. According to surveys conducted by the trans\* advocacy group "T-Action," in 2022, trans\* individuals in Russia faced a severe shortage of medication for hormone therapy, leading to a significant deterioration in their mental health. This situation is likely to result in the forced emigration of a large number of trans\* people, raising urgent questions about support for access to necessary hormone therapy medication, safe housing, integration, and psychological assistance.

Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine has fundamentally affected the lives of LGBTIQ\* individuals. According to a survey conducted by the human rights organizations "Vyhod" and "Sphera," more than two-thirds of the LGBTIQ\* respondents stated that Russia’s war against Ukraine had personally affected them and had led to an increase in homophobic and xenophobic attitudes within the Russian Federation. Additionally, 78% of respondents reported feeling more vulnerable and unsafe as LGBTIQ\* individuals after February 24, 2022.

LGBTIQ\* organizations in Russia have been advocating for human rights, freedom, and democracy for years. Many of them, such as Vyhod, T-Action, and the LGBT Network, have already been added to the list of so-called “foreign agents,” making their work officially impossible and rendering them invisible. Despite this, they continue to fight, remain engaged—both in small and significant ways—using diverse and creative approaches.

Many LGBTIQ\* activists are not only fighting for the rights of LGBTIQ\* individuals and other minorities but also actively protesting against Russia’s war in Ukraine, putting themselves at risk of criminal prosecution. Among the many hundreds of political prisoners, there are also activists from the LGBTIQ\* community and those who support them, such as the "Feminist Anti-War Resistance" (FAS). One of the most well-known cases is that of Sasha Skochilenko, who replaced price tags in grocery stores with information about Russia's war crimes in Ukraine. For this, she was arrested and remains imprisoned to this day, facing a possible sentence of up to 10 years in a penal colony.

Political persecution has forced many LGBTIQ\* activists to leave Russia, making LGBTIQ\* rights even more invisible. Due to deep distrust of law enforcement, human rights violations and acts of violence against LGBTIQ\* individuals are rarely reported to the police. Among those who did seek police assistance, the majority were denied the right to file a case. Activists and human rights organizations now face the challenge of providing LGBTIQ\* individuals—whether they remain in Russia or have fled—with legal and psychological support, as well as ensuring that their expertise on human rights violations against the LGBTIQ\* community reaches the international public.

Our partners in Russia and Belarus—whether LGBTIQ\* organizations or individual activists—need our solidarity, whether through public attention, local support to help them continue their work, or the expansion of an unbureaucratic admission program that enables LGBTIQ\* activists to be evacuated quickly.

We also see the urgent need for simplified migration procedures for trans\* individuals. The transphobic draft law in Russia represents an unprecedented intrusion into the privacy of trans\* individuals and a severe human rights violation. It not only restricts freedom of expression and access to information but also denies the fundamental human right to adequate medical care.

Above all, we must not forget those who belong to particularly vulnerable groups within the LGBTIQ\* community, such as same-sex families with underage children, trans\* and intersex\* individuals, people with disabilities, and LGBTIQ\* individuals affected by military mobilization. They, too, have the right to a life of dignity, safety, and freedom.

## For Safe Escape Routes for LGBTIQ Asylum Seekers

At the end of last year, the German government identified queer refugees as a particularly vulnerable group as part of its "Queer Leben" action plan and announced that it would place greater focus on the human rights of LGBTIQ\* people worldwide. In many Eastern European and Central Asian countries, LGBTIQ\* individuals continue to face discrimination, legal persecution, and extreme violence. We are watching with horror as the long-standing and now escalating repression against the LGBTIQ\* community in Russia unfolds. Whether from Chechnya, where public LGBTIQ\* activism is equivalent to a death sentence, or from the rest of Russia, where all safe spaces have been destroyed and a secure life for LGBTIQ\* individuals is no longer possible, many are being forced to flee. Most of them initially seek refuge in neighboring countries, where they often encounter similarly queer-hostile policies and societies.

Even in neighboring states such as Belarus, Georgia, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and others, LGBTIQ\* individuals are not safe due to widespread homophobia, transphobia, and queerphobia. In Uzbekistan, for example, homosexuality is criminalized and punishable by up to three years in prison, and HIV-positive individuals are further persecuted.

Georgia, too, is not a safe country for LGBTIQ\* individuals. We all witnessed the brutal attack on Tbilisi Pride on July 8, 2023, carried out by far-right, ultraconservative, and pro-Russian groups. Similar violent incidents occurred in 2013 when Pride participants were brutally attacked and injured. Security forces and state authorities fail to take adequate measures to protect Pride demonstrators and the broader LGBTIQ\* community. Queerphobia, homophobia, and transphobia have a longstanding presence in Georgia, supported by political forces that introduce legislation similar to Russia’s so-called "propaganda law."

Persecution based on sexual orientation or gender identity, and the threat to life and freedom that it entails, are recognized grounds for asylum in Germany. Unfortunately, we see that very few actually make it to Europe, and we fear that the current direction of EU asylum policy will further restrict the rights and protections of LGBTIQ\* refugees.

On June 8, we were deeply shocked to learn that the EU interior ministers, including Germany, approved one of the most severe restrictions on asylum rights in decades. Under these new regulations, asylum seekers will be required to submit their applications directly at the EU's external borders without access to independent legal advice and will be forced to remain in detention-like conditions while their cases are processed. We fear that this will severely restrict their access to a fair and lawful asylum process.

Up to 30,000 people are expected to be housed in these facilities, with many forced into the so-called "border procedure," where their asylum claims will be processed in a fast-track system within just a few weeks. Alarmingly, this policy does not exclude even families with children or other highly vulnerable groups, including LGBTIQ\* individuals.

Whether such a rushed process can ensure a thorough examination of asylum claims is highly questionable. It risks denying LGBTIQ\* refugees their fundamental right to asylum. Furthermore, if their claims are rejected, they face immediate deportation to so-called "safe third countries," some of which continue to subject queer refugees to discrimination and persecution.

We demand safe and fast escape routes for LGBTIQ asylum seekers to queer-friendly EU states, where they can live freely and with full protection of their rights! We call for a solidary EU asylum policy and join the protests against the tightening of asylum laws!

## LGBTIQ Refugees and Migrants in Germany

As a result of war and persecution, many LGBTIQ\* individuals from Ukraine, Russia, and other Eastern European or Central Asian countries have fled to Germany. Every day, we receive requests for help from LGBTIQ\* refugees and migrants across the country. The situation in initial reception centers is particularly challenging. Upon arrival in Germany, LGBTIQ\* refugees frequently face discrimination, threats, and, in the worst cases, experiences of violence. Belonging to the LGBTIQ\* community while also being a refugee or migrant creates a high risk of multiple discrimination, which can limit equal participation in society. This is especially evident in the housing market. The already strained housing situation is particularly challenging for queer refugees, often leading to months of psychological distress. Many LGBTIQ\* refugees require support across multiple areas of life. Therefore, they not only need safe housing but also access to tailored services and professionals who are trained to understand their needs.

Access to LGBTIQ\*-specific healthcare must be ensured and should not depend on language proficiency. Far too often, medical appointments, including life-saving examinations and treatments, are canceled due to a lack of language interpretation services. Additionally, mental health must not be neglected, particularly for individuals who have experienced violence or discrimination. On top of this, many face severe psychological stress due to traumatic war experiences, personal losses, and ongoing worries about family and friends left behind in their home countries. Access to psychological support and interpretation services should not be reliant on the availability of volunteers in the long term.

Given current global political developments and the situation of LGBTIQ\* rights worldwide, it is likely that LGBTIQ\* individuals will continue to seek refuge in Germany in the future. To provide effective and professional support, sustainable and long-term aid and counseling structures must be established as low-barrier points of contact. This can only be achieved with the involvement of queer initiatives and migrant organizations that have long been advocating for LGBTIQ\* refugees and migrants, while also strengthening the visibility of PostOst communities in Germany. At the same time, this approach will help create structures that empower the Russian-speaking LGBTIQ community in Germany\* and provide a foundation for exiled activists to continue their human rights work.


